Raft Locking Advice

If you are wondering how to use locks in the 6.824 Raft labs, here are
some rules and ways of thinking that might be helpful.

Rule 1: Whenever you have data that more than one goroutine uses, and
at least one goroutine might modify the data, the goroutines should
use locks to prevent simultaneous use of the data. The Go race
detector is pretty good at detecting violations of this rule (though
it won't help with any of the rules below).

Rule 2: Whenever code makes a sequence of modifications to shared
data, and other goroutines might malfunction if they looked at the
data midway through the sequence, you should use a lock around the
whole sequence.

An example:

  rf.mu.Lock()
  rf.currentTerm += 1
  rf.state = Candidate
  rf.mu.Unlock()

It would be a mistake for another goroutine to see either of these
updates alone (i.e. the old state with the new term, or the new term
with the old state). So we need to hold the lock continuously over the
whole sequence of updates. All other code that uses rf.currentTerm or
rf.state must also hold the lock, in order to ensure exclusive access
for all uses.

The code between Lock() and Unlock() is often called a "critical
section." The locking rules a programmer chooses (e.g. "a goroutine
must hold rf.mu when using rf.currentTerm or rf.state") are often
called a "locking protocol".

Rule 3: Whenever code does a sequence of reads of shared data (or
reads and writes), and would malfunction if another goroutine modified
the data midway through the sequence, you should use a lock around the
whole sequence.

An example that could occur in a Raft RPC handler:

  rf.mu.Lock()
  if args.Term > rf.currentTerm {
   rf.currentTerm = args.Term
  }
  rf.mu.Unlock()

This code needs to hold the lock continuously for the whole sequence.
Raft requires that currentTerm only increases, and never decreases.
Another RPC handler could be executing in a separate goroutine; if it
were allowed to modify rf.currentTerm between the if statement and the
update to rf.currentTerm, this code might end up decreasing
rf.currentTerm. Hence the lock must be held continuously over the
whole sequence. In addition, every other use of currentTerm must hold
the lock, to ensure that no other goroutine modifies currentTerm
during our critical section.

Real Raft code would need to use longer critical sections than these
examples; for example, a Raft RPC handler should probably hold the
lock for the entire handler.

Rule 4: It's usually a bad idea to hold a lock while doing anything
that might wait: reading a Go channel, sending on a channel, waiting
for a timer, calling time.Sleep(), or sending an RPC (and waiting for the
reply). One reason is that you probably want other goroutines to make
progress during the wait. Another reason is deadlock avoidance. Imagine
two peers sending each other RPCs while holding locks; both RPC
handlers need the receiving peer's lock; neither RPC handler can ever
complete because it needs the lock held by the waiting RPC call.

Code that waits should first release locks. If that's not convenient,
sometimes it's useful to create a separate goroutine to do the wait.

Rule 5: Be careful about assumptions across a drop and re-acquire of a
lock. One place this can arise is when avoiding waiting with locks
held. For example, this code to send vote RPCs is incorrect:

  rf.mu.Lock()
  rf.currentTerm += 1
  rf.state = Candidate
  for <each peer> {
    go func() {
      rf.mu.Lock()
      args.Term = rf.currentTerm
      rf.mu.Unlock()
      Call("Raft.RequestVote", &args, ...)
      // handle the reply...
    } ()
  }
  rf.mu.Unlock()

The code sends each RPC in a separate goroutine. It's incorrect
because args.Term may not be the same as the rf.currentTerm at which
the surrounding code decided to become a Candidate. Lots of time may
pass between when the surrounding code creates the goroutine and when
the goroutine reads rf.currentTerm; for example, multiple terms may
come and go, and the peer may no longer be a candidate. One way to fix
this is for the created goroutine to use a copy of rf.currentTerm made
while the outer code holds the lock. Similarly, reply-handling code
after the Call() must re-check all relevant assumptions after
re-acquiring the lock; for example, it should check that
rf.currentTerm hasn't changed since the decision to become a
candidate.

It can be difficult to interpret and apply these rules. Perhaps most
puzzling is the notion in Rules 2 and 3 of code sequences that
shouldn't be interleaved with other goroutines' reads or writes. How
can one recognize such sequences? How should one decide where a
sequence ought to start and end?

One approach is to start with code that has no locks, and think
carefully about where one needs to add locks to attain correctness.
This approach can be difficult since it requires reasoning about the
correctness of concurrent code.

A more pragmatic approach starts with the observation that if there
were no concurrency (no simultaneously executing goroutines), you
would not need locks at all. But you have concurrency forced on you
when the RPC system creates goroutines to execute RPC handlers, and
because you need to send RPCs in separate goroutines to avoid waiting.
You can effectively eliminate this concurrency by identifying all
places where goroutines start (RPC handlers, background goroutines you
create in Make(), &c), acquiring the lock at the very start of each
goroutine, and only releasing the lock when that goroutine has
completely finished and returns. This locking protocol ensures that
nothing significant ever executes in parallel; the locks ensure that
each goroutine executes to completion before any other goroutine is
allowed to start. With no parallel execution, it's hard to violate
Rules 1, 2, 3, or 5. If each goroutine's code is correct in isolation
(when executed alone, with no concurrent goroutines), it's likely to
still be correct when you use locks to suppress concurrency. So you
can avoid explicit reasoning about correctness, or explicitly
identifying critical sections.

However, Rule 4 is likely to be a problem. So the next step is to find
places where the code waits, and to add lock releases and re-acquires
(and/or goroutine creation) as needed, being careful to re-establish
assumptions after each re-acquire. You may find this process easier to
get right than directly identifying sequences that must be locked for
correctness.

(As an aside, what this approach sacrifices is any opportunity for
better performance via parallel execution on multiple cores: your code
is likely to hold locks when it doesn't need to, and may thus
unnecessarily prohibit parallel execution of goroutines. On the other
hand, there is not much opportunity for CPU parallelism within a
single Raft peer.)